I'd like this interview to be sort of
chronological in nature. First, I'd like for you
to tell me how you became interested in science. In
science? Why, I became interested in science as a
small boy through an interest in natural history.
And, well, first I collected the butterflies. I
was an eight-year-old or thereabouts. And then I
became interested in birds, and I got to be a pretty
good ornithologist, I think. I was an amateur and
belonged to the professional bird club in
Philadelphia, near which I grew up. And by the time
I went to college and realized that I had to make up
my mind about something, I decided that the thing
which I would do best in was something I was
interested in. And I was interested in natural
history. And the way you made your living in those
days in natural history was to be a professor of
biology, you see. So that, I think, answers your
question. Where did you go to school? Well, I went
to the public schools in the town that I lived in
until I was ready for high school. Then I went to the
Harvard School, which is a good private school
near Philadelphia.
And then I went to Harvard College for one year, and
then transferred to Harvard, where I took my
bachelor's degree and my doctor's degree. And you
majored in biology at Harvard, right? Yes. What
brought you to Woods Hole? The Marine Biological
Laboratory. When did you come? I think it was in
19...
which would have been the second year I graduated
in 1913 as a member of the class of 1914 at Harvard. I
went through it three years, having been for one
additional year at Harvard College, because I had
four years of college, but only three years at
Harvard. And then the...
the first year of graduate study I I had a job which
as sort of a tutor and then the second year I came to
Woods Hole and I worked in the laboratory of the
Bureau of Fisheries the reason I worked there was
that for some reason which I am not clear about when
the Bureau Fisheries Laboratory was built in
Woods Hole back in the 70s. It was arranged, I
suspect by Alexander Agassiz, that Harvard and
Yale and Princeton and one or two other colleges,
perhaps, were to have working tables for their
people during the summer in that laboratory. So I
went there as a Harvard graduate student. I didn't
work on physics at all. My doctor's thesis, which I
was working on then, was on horned toads, which are
lizards, which I used to import from Texas. And
then the following year, I took the physiology
course in the MBL. And then following that, I did
research there for quite a number of years until
the Oceanographic Institution was founded. And
you were at the Oceanographic Institution when it
was founded? Yes, at the very beginning. Yes. What
was your role there? I was known, I think, as the
senior biologist.
You see, Dr. Bigelow, who became the director, And
at the forum, a staff had practically no
oceanographers in this country to draw on. There
were one or two young men, such as and Dr.
who had worked at sea a good bit. But there were
practically no oceanographers people devoting
themselves primarily to the ocean. They were
either biologists or something else, some other
kind of scientist. And Bigelow hunted around for
people of that sort who he could persuade could
find the ocean a profitable place to make their
studies. And I was one of the few physiologists who
had paid any attention to marine animals. I was
then studying hemocyanin, which is the
respiratory pigment of a number of groups of
marine animals, analogous to hemoglobin, and was
making naturally. I think this is... It's
speculative, but I think this is the reason that I
was selected. I also knew Bigelow, but I don't
think that was the particular reason. But he did
know who I was. What sort of man was Bigelow like?
Well, I'd like to refer you to a memorial which I
wrote for the National Academy of Science
following his death. Do you know that series? Yes.
Yes. But you'll find in a very recent volume of that
a paper, a fairly long paper, about Bigelow, which
I think will answer that question better than
anything I can give off the cuff. When you came to
Woods Hole and began to do your science,
did you immediately go to sea? No.
I had this work to finish up. And I worked on that for
several summers until I exhausted the immediate
obvious possibilities. Bigelow, however, as I
say in my article about him, insisted that the
members of the staff all go to sea.
he arranged that each of us would have perhaps a
week on the Atlantis to do whatever we wanted.
So that I went to sea in that capacity. And during
the
first, one of the first winters, I undertook to
make a survey of the Gulf of Maine, which he had
studied. very extensively, previously. But he
had worked with ships which he could borrow from
time to time. And his, although he covered all of
the months in his surveys, except that during
which there was part of shooting.
Yeah. They were not synchronous, you see, or
continuous. They were scattered all over a period
of perhaps 10 years, whereas I undertook to go out
on the average of every five or six weeks and make a
survey and go about the same ground, you see, so as
to get a strictly comparable picture of the
seasonal changes which occurred. And this was
really then your first work in oceanography, was
this survey. Yes. And by that time, remember, I was
at least 40 years old. I forget exactly, 40 to 50
years old. So I have never felt that I was
acquainted with the background of oceanography
as I am with the, or was with the background of
physiology, which I taught for quite a number of
years.
Yeah, except, you know, that most scientists who
came into oceanography came in with no prior
oceanographic training. They just... Well,
there was none. There was none. Just became
oceanographers. Yes. And frequently were marine
biologists. Yes. Or biologists who... Well,
during that first year, there were a half a dozen
people here at Woods Hole and a few similar people
at Scripps. We were the only really
well-established oceanographic institutions
They had a department at the University of
Washington, but that was fairly local, I think.
What was your first experience at sea like? Did you
like it immediately? Well, I had grown up down here
on the Cape as a boy in the summer, so I was used to
boats and used to the water, and there was nothing
surprising.
I liked it. I discovered that it was very hard work.
Oh, yeah? Yeah, because... You had to be up and
working whenever the ship got to the place that you
wanted it to be. And in a small area, such as the Gulf
of Maine, that was only every few hours. So it was
very hard work. And that was continuously being
awake and sleeping only for a snatch here and
there, as you could. And I can remember On one trip,
which I went and had no one to help me, I didn't take
my clothes off or my shoes off for two or three
weeks. Simply didn't have time. I did the work on
deck, and then I went and laid down on my bunk, and
they woke me up when I got to the next place. And I got
up and did what I had to do and laid down on my bunk
again. So it was very hard work. Of course, on a
large ocean voyage, it takes longer. The
positions are spaced out at greater distances. So
it doesn't that work. So I think the modern
oceanography has a very easy time compared to what
we have. They have very much more luxurious ships
and more comfortable. Who were your colleagues
here in the early years? At the Oceanographic. Oh,
at the Oceanographic. Yes.
My colleagues, that is, the heads of the
different, I won't call them departments,
because they were not departments, but of the
different groups, were, first of all, Carl
Rossby, who was a meteorologist at Tech, Selman
Waxman, who was a bacteriologist from Rutgers,
Norris Raichstraw, who was a chemist from Brown,
Those
are the three that come to my mind. There must have
been more.
Did you guys collaborate a lot on your work? Did you
exchange ideas? We knew each other pretty well. I
don't think we actually collaborated unless we
worked together. I think if you look over the
papers, you will find very few joint-page papers.
But the institution was so, so small that we knew
each other very well.
Now, you didn't just continue your work here on the
bay, though. What do you do next?
Well, as I say, this took about a year and a half to
study the Gulf of Maine. And I made one trip. as far
as to Bermuda and the Saw, which of course was very
little. And that's about the limit of my seagoing
experience. A few short trips locally, but really
very small compared to what the boys do today. They
think nothing of going around the world.
Yeah, yeah. In the development of the early
institution, how did you try to encourage it to
grow? In the development of the early
grow? What kind of people did you try to bring into
the oceanographic institution?
Well, I don't think we thought too much about that.
In the first place, we were not particularly
interested in growth. It was never conceived that
this would become the great institution that it
has become today. Dr. Bigelow was not that kind of a
person. He had no ambition, no grand ambitions. He
believed very much in doing good, honest work. He
believed very much in observation, much more
than, I think, than thought. That was perhaps his
weakness.
And so what we were concerned with was doing what we
were trying to do and to bring our students up to do
likewise.
My students during that period, the only one that I
think has become an oceanographer was Dr.
Ketchum, who came down with me. He was my graduate
student at Harvard. And he came down in the
summers. And I sent him off on the ship. And we
published a paper together, which I think was
quite a good paper, quite an important paper at the
time. The other students that I brought down were
students at the Harvard Medical School.
Well, let's see. They, I guess,
they were before the oceanographic and worked
with me at the... At the lab? At the MBL and at the
Harvard Medical School. They were medical
students.
And so primarily then you just sort of brought
students with you, I'm to take it, as they worked
here in the early days of the oceanographic
institution? Yes, yes. And, of course, after that
first period of nine or ten years, the war broke
out. And that changed things entirely. In what
way? Well, we weren't working on our own problems.
We were working on the problems which the
government asked us to study, chiefly the Navy.
Right. And the first project was the development
of anti-fouling paints. which was started under
Dr. Waxman, because at that time there was the idea
that bacterial slimes which formed on the bottom
of the ship were important. And I don't know just
why he dropped out of it, but by the time it was
pretty obvious that we were going to become
engaged in the war, but before we were in the war, I
was asked to come down and take charge of that. And
I've been here ever since. And your first work,
then, was on these anti-fouling paints. Yes. Who
worked on that with you? Dr. Ketchum was the chief
one. Dr. Ferre, who is a physical chemist now at
Wisconsin, and was then, I guess, at Harvard, a
graduate student.
Dr. Wren, who was a bacteriologist. one of Dr.
Watson's students.
Then we recruited quite a number of additional
students. There were three or four men from Yale
who were students chiefly of Evelyn Hutchinson,
Dr. Edmondson, and Dr. Hutchins. And
I don't think Dr. Riley actually worked with me or
with the troupe.
There was one other, Dr. Deeby.
And from any fouling paints, then what did you do?
Well, then I became also... I became interested in
the problem of submarine diving. And they had
developed here the bathythermograph, which
you've heard about. And they were developing one
to use on a submarine. And I had ideas about that.
They were not successful ideas. And so I was asked
to sort of look over Mr. Vine's shoulder, who was
working on the one which was ultimately adapted.
And so I spent a good part of the war years also
working on that problem, and particularly in
instructing the crews of submarines how to use
this instrument. And I made a good many cruises out
of New London and Portsmouth with new submarines
and new cruisers and new, new, new crews
instructing them in this matter of underwater
sound. At the end of the war, I wrote a book on the
underwater operation of submarines. That's
right. I have never, the war ended about the time
that book was published. I have only seen one copy,
which Vine swiped off somebody's desk. That's
right. The only copy I've ever seen Vine has. Yes.
I've never seen any except that. I have no copy of
it, but I wrote the only word of it. Did you work with
Vine in this? Yes. Yes. Yes, he was working on this
instrument, you see. Yeah. And I was seeing that he
got something done, essentially what I was doing.
Yeah. And we worked together on an instrument
called the STD.
S-T-D.
Salinity Temperature Depth, which was a device
which you could lower and it sort of measured the
salinity temperature and depth of the water that
went through. And that has gone through some
evolution and is still used. Yes. When did you
first meet Roger Revell?
I think it must have been in Washington.
I can't remember the place. I can remember the time
very well. I went into this office, and here was my
idea of a beautiful young naval officer. I don't
know whether you are old enough to remember, but at
that time in these subway cars, There were
advertisements, you know. And there were naval
recruiting advertisements to join the Navy and
see the world, that sort of thing. And there was
always a beautiful, very handsome young officer
with a high, stiff collar, usually, and a
beautiful cap, you see. And here was the living
image of this fellow. And he was Mr. Reveille,
Lieutenant Commandant, Lieutenant I guess, at
that time.
And then I worked for him when he became more
authoritative in Washington. I worked for him.
When did you go to work for him? Huh? When did you go
to work for him? Oh, I don't remember. About 1946,
wasn't it? Well, 45 or 46. In the organization of
the early organization of ONR. Yes. What were you
doing there? What were you doing there? Well, I
wasn't there. I was here in Woods Hole. But I was
studying things that they wanted to know, you see.
And I would make these studies and write reports on
them and turn them into Roger. And Roger would
insist on rewriting them. He would. It made me so
goddamn mad. I am an amateur watercolor painter.
And I can remember at that time I used to get so mad at
Roger that I couldn't sleep. And I would get up and I
would turn on the electric light and I would get out
my paints and I would paint pictures out of my head.
Pictures of boats, which I happen to know pretty
well. And they were the best pictures I've ever
painted.
But they were all stimulated by the fact that Roger
annoyed me so much.
What were you working on in 1946 and 1947 for ONR?
What was the next project? Were you staying with
submarines? Yes, yes. I worked for ONR on this
submarine problem. And, well, what I can remember
was I got the idea. I was familiar with the sailing
directions, you see, which the government
publishes, which tells you if you're operating a
ship, what you will encounter in various places,
do you see? The winds, the tides, the currents, the
supplies, and so on. An invaluable source of
information for the man who was operating a ship
and going anywhere. And I thought that it would be
useful to get a submarine supplement to sailing
directions, which would tell the submarine
skipper what he might expect if he operated his
ship in certain waters, in terms of the
hydrography of that area. And so I wrote. It was at
the time they were planning the invasion of North
Africa. And I wrote a submarine supplement
covering the Bay of Biscay from which they would
naturally land. It was the first submarine
subloan.
I guess I'm old fashioned. I like to see things in
black and white written in sentences as short and
explicit as possible. That doesn't go,
apparently. You have to be funny. So they took the
job of writing in some future summary supplements
away from me and gave it to a man, I think his name was
George Stewart, who was quite a good novelist. on
the West Coast. And they were sort of Hollywood
productions, and I felt, well, nothing of them. I
don't know whether anybody ever read any of them.
When the war is over, you stay here at Woods Hole.
What's your first job at Woods Hole, then? What?
When the war is over, you remain at Woods Hole. What
do you do with the osteographing institution
then? Well, my job was to, of course... I was the
senior biologist. I was responsible for the
biological development here. And
my chief problem was to get money for biology. The
work on underwater sound, which the
Oceanographic did through Iswin and Ewing, was so
successful, you see, that it sold oceanography.
to the Navy and through them to the world. But the
Navy was not yet aware that there was any
importance in biology. So they were supporting
physical oceanography, but there was no support
for biological oceanography.
And the place that I found that I could develop
support with people who were private individuals
or communities which were interested in
pollution.
And that we knew something about estuaries and how
to study the chemistry of coastal waters. And it
was on the basis of that that we got contracts with
private individuals or private organizations.
The first one was with the National Lead Company.
Mm-hm. They mine for titanium up in the
Adirondacks. And there's
an interesting story to that, but it's nothing to
do with this. They carry it down to near the mouth of
the Rurican River, where they have a big chemical
plant, and they refine it to get out titanium
oxide, which is a white material, which is used for
making porcelain, white, in bathtubs and all that
sort of use. And it's used in white paints as a
substitute for... lead oxide. And so that was why
the National Lead Company was interested in
titanium, you see. Titanium was replacing lead as
a constituent in ordinary paints. And they were
sitting on as much titanium as they could sit on. In
the course of their chemical refinement of this
ore, they had to treat it with sulfuric acid. And
they had a large amount of sulfuric acid and iron,
which is also present in the ore, as a waste
product. And they started dumping that into the
Raritan River. And they made such a mess that the
state very quickly said, you have got to stop
dumping this stuff into the Raritan River. You
must dispose of it elsewhere. And they found that
they spent about, I think they told me, five or six
million dollars trying to find some method of
recovering material from this waste, which would
pay for itself, and they couldn't find it. And so
they decided to barge it out to sea and dump it into
the ocean. And they had no sooner decided to do
that, and it became known that they were going to do
it, then that there was a very smart sports writer
in New York who wrote for, I think it was the
American,
who ran
a column in the New York paper, American, for the
benefit of the sport fishermen, you see. And in
this column, he began telling how this waste was,
not will, but was,
running nets and so on and so on. Before a drop of it
had ever been put in the ocean. These stories began
circulating, you see, of very harmful effects.
Well, the National Lead Company had not a chemical
problem, but a public relations problem. Right.
And they engaged us to study their operations. And
I can remember they sent me an account of this
barge, how big it was, how fast it was to be towed,
how fast they were to pump out this material, what
the chemical composition was. And I studied it,
and I made a very good, what turned out to be a very
good prognostication of what was going to happen
to the chemistry of the water. And then when they
finally got the barge built, And they took it out
with the first load of material. We took a small
ship from which hole and went down and we followed
it. And we zigzagged back and forth in its wake,
measuring the seawater at different distances
from the outpost.